CitiBike Summer 2023 Analysis

Map Trends:
This initial map portrays the CitiBike Data in May 2023 for the number of rides at every starting station utilized from Washington Heights down and through parts of Brooklyn. Roughly 3.6 million bikes were ridden during this time with a higher concentration of rides falling within Lower Manhattan and the Financial district. Other features of this map include sizing of markers based on quantity of rides, and a controllable filter for number of rides. When filtered to start at about 8500 rides, the top ten most ridden starting stations are shown. Eight out of these ten stations fall south of the Empire State Building, highlighting the concentration of rides. Another map is included that portrays the End of Ride Stations for May of 2023. 

Phenomena Analysis:
In order to see any interesting trends to predict into Summer 2024, I began my analysis in May of 2023. My first dashboard called "Key Takeaways May 2023" uses all visualizations I created in analyzing this data. My first visualization is a horizontal bar chart in which I categorize the consumers into the groups of regular customers and subscribers, then extend the top used station search into the top stations based on time spent on rides rather than the number of rides. In May, for both consumer categories, the top station has 1500-3000 more minutes of ride time than the next top station. Investigating time ridden further, I used a side-by-side bar chart to visualize how long each category of consumer spent on an average ride for the two styles of bikes available. In this chart and others I excluded the time that subscribers docked their bikes at a station as I knew that would cause the time ridden for subscribers to be inflated. This can be brought back using the filter if further analysis is on this section is advised. Overall in May, classic bikes were the favored style over EBikes by all consumers, and regular customers out-rode subscribers by roughly 11 minutes on average. Further study on who these regular customers are could shine light on how many users are from out of town. Potentially, those visiting as tourists could be the cause of the longer ride times. 

For my second phenomena I utilized similar visualizations from my first dashboard to analyze the trends from month to month in the Summer of 2023. The dashboards titled "Summer 2023..." all display the visualizations I made and used to investigate possible trends. For the dashboard titled "Summer 2023 Hours," I began by making four line graphs that show the usage of CitiBikes throughout the day, based on the number of rides. There is a clear pattern within the subscriber base with daily peaks at 8am and 5pm throughout the summer months. This is to be expected as those are the typical work hours for potential consumers. The number of rides range from 260,000 - 300,000 during the 5pm peak while for the 8am peak the rides range from 170,000 - 190,000. There are no strong peaks shown for the regular customers in these graphs, but rather a steady number of rides hovering around 60,000 - 70,000. As these are averages for the number of rides in the given months, we are not able to see peak days throughout the months, but could with easy manipulations. My next dashboard titled "Summer 2023 Rides," uses side-by-side bar charts that display the number of rides for the two consumer groups for each of the months of focus. A steady growth in rides for subscribers can be observed in each subsequent month except for a slight decline in June. This growth is mirrored in the regular customers without the decline in June. My last dashboard, "Summer 2023 Bike Styles," has additional bar charts that split the consumer groups and display the style of bike that each group uses more. Classic style bikes outnumber the EBike usage for both consumer groups. Subscribers show nearly 2 million more rides on the classic style than on the EBike. Interestingly, EBike usage in both groups decline as the summer months progress. In May, a total of roughly 450,000 rides were taken on EBikes as compared to 310,000 in August. Why the decline? 

Summary:
In summary, CitiBikes are clearly very popular to use in the New York City Area. Barring any major technological advancements, I would suggest prioritizing the upkeep of the Classic Bike Style as it is shown to be the most popular style by any user. As is the trend over time, the number of rides each month should continue to increase, which could cause the need for more bikes and stations to be addressed. The other months of the year may contradict this, but further study of those months would be needed to investigate this. 
